Practical 00: Set up the environment

We will need to set up our development environment before we start the practicals.  The instructions that are contained here are intended to be brief - we will be going through this again in the first workshop.  The instructions have been written for a Windows environment, but similar steps would be applicable for a Mac or Linux environment.

We will be using three key applications for our development this semester: Google Chrome, Visual Studio Code, and XAMPP.

1.Download and install Google Chrome 


2.Download and install XAMPP


    1.Just need to select MySQL and phpMyAdmin - by default PHP should be selected.
    2.Install XAMPP at the default location (c:\xampp).
    3.Start the XAMPP Control Panel once it has finished installing.
    4.Start the Apache Module and the MySQL module to ensure no errors.

3.Download and install Visual Studio Code
    1.Install using default settings.
    2.Open Visual Studio Code.

4.Web development strongly benefits from a consistent and clean directory (folder) structure.  Now we are going to set up our development folder structure.

    1.Throughout the semester you will be creating a folder structure that looks like the following:
        www
            prac-1
                checkpoint-1
                checkpoint-2
                ...
            prac-2
                checkpoint-1
                checkpoint-2
                ...
            prac-3
                checkpoint-1
                checkpoint-2
                ...
            TLDR
                any required folders and files
    2.In Visual Studio Code click on the Open Folder option.
    3.Navigate to where you have installed XAMPP (c:\xampp by default)
    4.Navigate to the htdocs folder in your xampp folder.
    5.Create a new folder called www, then click Select Folder.
    6.Create a new folder in www and name it prac-1.
    7.Create a new folder in prac-1 and name it checkpoint-1.

5.Now we will fix an association between VS Code and XAMPP before installing some extensions to make our development process easier. 

    1.In VS Code in your checkpoint-1 directory create a new file called index.php.
    2.An error will appear saying it cannot validate since a PHP installation could not be found.
    3.Click the blue Open Settings button.
    4.Click the Edit in settings.json link that appears
    5.In the "php.validate.executablePath": property add the location of your XAMPP php install, by default: "C:/xampp/php/php.exe"
    6.Close the settings tabs and return to the index.php page - the error should have disappeared.
    7.We can remove the index.php file now.
    8.For Practical 01 we need some files to get us started.  We will use one of these files now to finalise the setup of our environment.
    9.Add the me.html file to your prac-1/checkpoint-1 folder.

6.Now we will add some extensions to VS Code.

    1.Click on the Extensions button.
    2.Search for "php intelephense" **note the incorrect spelling is correct**, then click Install.
    3.Search for "live server", then click Install.
    4.Search for "php server", then click install.

7.Our last step is to hook all this in with Google Chrome to allow for efficient development.

    1.Open Google Chrome and with your XAMPP server running, go to the web address: localhost.  This will bring up your XAMPP dashboard.
    2.We want to show our web page though so we should change the web address to: localhost/www/prac-1/checkpoint-1/me.html.  This will load our starting page.
    3.In VS Code open the me.html file and edit the second TODO task and replace the section with the topic code (COMP2030).
    4.Save your file and reload the Chrome page, you should now see the topic code on the page with the other content.
    5.Rather than having to refresh the page on Chrome every time we make a change, we will use an extension that will handle this for us.
    6.Open Settings in Chrome, i.e., click the three vertical dots to the right of the URL bar, click Settings in the menu.
    7.In the sidebar that opens click on Extensions (toward the bottom of the list).
    8.Click on the Extensions hamburger menu, then at the bottom of the page click on the Open Chrome Web Store.
    9.Search for Live Server, and click Add to Chrome.
    10.Click on the Extension button and select Live Server Web Extension.
    11.Switch the Live Reload toggle to on.
    12.The Actual Server Address should be set to http://localhost/www/
    13.The Live Server Address can be located by going back to VS Code and clicking the option at the bottom of the screen that says "Go Live".
    14.This will load a new page with a web address that is an IP address, e.g., http://192.168.0.100:5500/, copy the address from the URL bar and paste it into the Live Server Address.
    15.Hit Apply.
    16.You may need to restart Chrome.
    17.Navigate to your me.html page in Chrome.
    18.Now add the topic name to me.html.
    19.Save your changes and you should then see the page automatically updates with the changes.

8.You are now set up and ready to complete the first Practical.